PART 1: Some brief notes on dihedral, anhedral, sweep, and coupling between yaw and roll:

This "Theory" section mostly addresses the real and apparent forces at play during slips, skids, and "coordinated" flight. In later updates we'll delve into many, many more topics, such as the "airflow curvature" effect. (For some notes on the airflow curvature effect, check out the long article that I created several years ago.) In later updates we'll also focus heavily upon the coupling between yaw and roll, particularly in the case of a swept wing with anhedral. Very briefly: a wing with dihedral tends to have "positive" coupling between yaw and roll. By this we mean that if the nose of the aircraft gets yawed to the left in relation to the aircraft's actual direction of travel through the airmass, or if the aircraft is struck by a sudden crosswind gust from the right, then the aircraft will tend to roll to the left. The reason for this has nothing to do with one wing's lift vector being "more vertical" and the other wing's lift vector being "less vertical", as is sometimes alleged. This would not create any roll torque. Rather, the "upwind" wing experiences a greater angle-of-attack than the "downwind" wing, so that the upwind wing creates more lift than the downwind wing, creating a roll torque. Anhedral works the opposite way: a wing with anhedral tends to have "negative" coupling between yaw and roll. By this we mean that if nose of the aircraft gets yawed to the left in relation to the aircraft's actual direction of travel through the airmass, or if the aircraft is struck by a sudden crosswind gust from the right, then the aircraft will tend to roll to the left. The reason for this is that the "upwind" wing experiences a lower angle-of-attack than the "downwind" wing. Anhedral and dihedral effects are relatively independent of the angle-of-attack of the aircraft as a whole. Another important factor is sweep. A swept wing tends to have "positive" coupling between yaw and roll--just like a wing with dihedral. Here is the reason for this: when the relative wind includes a sideways component, then the "upwind" wing experiences an airflow that hits the leading edge nearly squarely head-on, while the "downwind" wing experiences an airflow with a large component parallel to the leading edge, blowing from root to tip. Therefore the "upwind" wing produces more lift than the "downwind" wing. This sweep effect is highly dependent on lift coefficient, i.e. on angle-of-attack. If the pilot unloads the wing to the zero-lift angle-of-attack, so that the lift coefficient is zero, then there will be no roll torque even if there is a strong sideways airflow component. If the pilot puts the wing at a high angle-of-attack---which will correspond either to a high G-loading, or to normal 1-G flight at a low airspeed--then a sideways airflow component over the wing will generate a very strong roll torque. The upshot of all this is that it is very possible for a swept, anhedral wing to show slight positive or neutral yaw-roll coupling at high angles-of-attack (when the pilot flies at trim or pushes out on the bar), and to show strong negative coupling at low angles-of-attack (when the pilot pulls the bar all the way in). The positive coupling seen at low airspeeds and high angles-of-attack is created by sweep, and the negative coupling seen at high airspeeds and low angles-of-attack is created by anhedral. I suspect that many modern hang gliders exhibit these characteristics. And here's one more twist in the whole picture: the anhedral in a hang glider wing is created in large part not by the droop in the leading edges relative to the keel, but rather by the washout built into the wing. Much more on this in later editions of this webpage!

 

PART 2: Notes on how a positive coupling between yaw and roll, due to dihedral or sweep, contributes to roll stability and allows an aircraft to be turned by rudder inputs

We'll explore in detail the relationship between the yaw-roll coupling due to sweep, dihedral, or anhedral, and the aircraft's resulting stability or instability in the roll axis, in a future update of this section. Again, this relationship has nothing to do with one wing's lift vector being "more vertical" than the other wing's lift vector when the aircraft banks, as is sometimes alleged. Rather, when the aircraft banks, the flight path starts to curve. If the nose does not yaw to keep pace with the changing direction of the flight path, then a sideways component will start to appear in the airflow over the wing. In other words the aircraft will start to slip sideways through the airmass. This will happen regardless of whether the pilot has intentionally banked the aircraft, or the aircraft has tipped a bit due to turbulence. Anytime the aircraft banks, it starts to slip sideways for at least a few seconds, until the aircraft's intrinsic yaw stability--the "weathervane" effect--applies enough yaw torque overcome the aircraft's yaw rotational inertia, and to overcome adverse yaw effects which will be present whenever the bank angle is changing, and to start the nose smoothly tracking around the horizon in a full-fledged non-slipping turn with the nose of the aircraft constantly pointing directly into the airflow. (Of course in an aircraft with a rudder, the pilot can bypass this slip by applying inside rudder to keep the nose pointing directly into the airflow right form the start, as the flight path starts to curve). Whenever the aircraft is experiencing a slip--i.e. a sideways component in the airflow--then sweep and dihedral or anhedral will all be acting to create a roll torque as described above. In an aircraft with dihedral or sweep, this roll torque will have a stabilizing effect. Here's why: if the left wing drops, then the tilted lift component from the banked wing starts pushing the aircraft toward the left. The flight path starts to curve, but it takes a little while before the aircraft's intrinsic yaw stability (the "weathervane effect") generates enough yaw torque to overcome the aircraft's yaw rotational inertia and increase the yaw rotation rate enough to keep the nose pointing squarely into the changing direction of the airflow as the turn continues. (Eventually this will happen, if the aircraft stays banked at a constant angle, and then the aircraft will be in a fully-fledged non-slipping turn). During these moments while the aircraft is slipping sideways through the air, the left wing is creating more lift than the right wing, either because the airflow is moving more "squarely" across the left wing than the right wing as seen from above (in the case of a wing with sweep) or because the left wing is at a higher angle-of-attack than the right wing (in the case of a wing with dihedral). This imbalance in lift tends to return the aircraft to wings-level.

If an aircraft with dihedral or sweep has too much yaw stability--i.e. too large a vertical tail fin--then if the aircraft gets tipped to one side, it will quickly "weathervane" into a full-fledged, non-slipping turn before the dihedral or sweep have any chance to roll the aircraft back toward wings-level. The large fin decreases the roll stability that would normally be created by the sweep or dihedral. By the same logic, if an aircraft has a lot of dihedral or sweep, then when the pilot makes an intentional roll input, it will be important for him to also use the rudder to keep the nose pointing directly into the airflow so that there is no sideslip. If the aircraft slips sideways due to adverse yaw or yaw rotational inertia when the pilot makes a roll input to bank the wing, and a lot of sweep or dihedral is present, then an unfavorable, opposing roll torque will be created and the roll rate will be very sluggish. And by the same logic, if an aircraft has a lot of dihedral or sweep, then the rudder can be used to generate a roll torque by yawing (skidding) the nose of the aircraft in the direction that the pilot wants to turn. The resulting sideways airflow will interact with the dihedral or sweep to roll the aircraft in the desired direction. (This is precisely why many light aircraft can be steered with the rudder, without using the ailerons.)

 

PART 3: Notes on how a negative coupling between yaw and roll, due to anhedral, contributes to roll instability and roll responsiveness

Anhedral has a destabilizing effect, and makes the aircraft more responsive to the pilot's roll inputs (except in cases where adverse yaw is not an issue because the roll inputs are in accomplished via spoilerons). If an aircraft with a lot of anhedral gets tipped to one side, the resulting slip will tend to make the aircraft keep rolling to an ever-steeper bank angle. Here's why this destabilizing effect occurs: if the left wing drops, then the tilted lift component from the banked wing starts pushing the aircraft toward the left. The flight path starts to curve, but it takes a little while before the aircraft's intrinsic yaw stability (the "weathervane effect") generates enough yaw torque to overcome the aircraft's yaw rotational inertia and increase the yaw rotation rate enough to keep the nose pointing squarely into the changing direction of the airflow as the turn continues. (Eventually this will happen, if the aircraft stays banked at a constant angle, and then the aircraft will be in a fully-fledged non-slipping turn). During these moments while the aircraft is slipping sideways through the air, the right wing is creating more lift than the left wing, because the anhedral geometry is increasing the angle-of-attack of the right wing. This imbalance in lift tends to roll the aircraft to a steeper bank angle.

On an aircraft with anhedral, a large vertical fin can help to reduce this roll instability by increasing the aircraft's yaw responsiveness or "weathervane effect" so that there is less sideslip when a wing drops.

When the pilot makes a roll input, if the aircraft sideslips due to adverse yaw or yaw rotational inertia, this will actually create a favorable roll torque if anhedral is present. This is why anhedral is important in hang gliders. Anhedral actually "harnesses" adverse yaw (and yaw rotational inertia) in a way that increases the roll rate of the aircraft when the pilot makes an intentional roll input. Applying rudder along with the roll input, or having a large fixed vertical fin, can negate this effect and decrease the roll rate, though drag will naturally be decreased if the aircraft is not allowed to slip sidewise through the airmass. By the same token, over-use of a rudder, so that the nose of the aircraft skids over to point too far in the direction of the desired turn, will actually create an unfavorable or "wrong-way" roll torque if anhedral is present.

Obviously, the characteristics of a wing with both sweep and anhedral will be complex. In some cases, which of these two effects will dominate may depend on the wing's angle-of-attack (more on this later). This can create some very interesting stability and rudder-response characteristics.

Now we're going to change gears away from the subject of coupling between yaw and roll, and focus on the basic physics of slips, skids, and "coordinated" turns.

 

PART 4: Basic explanation of turns, slips, and skids:

Consider a banked aircraft. The wing's lift vector acts "square" to the wingspan (i.e. perpendicular to the wingspan) as seen in a head-on view. Therefore the wing's lift vector contains a horizontal component. This horizontal force component acts on the aircraft to create a curve in the flight path, as viewed from above--i.e. a turn. The horizontal component of lift is the "centripetal force"--i.e. the inward-pointing force--which is the fundamental cause of the turn. "Centripetal" means that this force component is always pointing toward the center of the circle described by the turning aircraft, which also means that the force component is always acting perpendicular to the direction that aircraft is actually travelling at any given moment. (Another familiar example of a "centripetal force" is the earth's gravity, which acts on a spacecraft, or on a satellite, or on the moon, to produce a continual curve in the orbiting body's trajectory, yielding a circle or an ellipse. Every time a moving body describes a curving path of travel, a centripetal force is at work.)

There are only two situations in which a banked aircraft would not end up following a curved flight path, as viewed from above. Case 1: if the pilot moves the control stick forward to "unload" the wing all the way to the zero-lift angle-of-attack, reducing the wing's lift vector to zero, then there will be no turn. (There's really no equivalent in hang-gliding, since even when the control bar is pulled all the way in, with the pilot's weight shifted all the way forward, the wing is not unloaded all the way to the zero-lift angle-of-attack, unless it is in the midst of a tumble after an upset in turbulence.) Case 2: if the aircraft is somehow generating additional aerodynamic forces which include a horizontal component acting toward the outside of the turn, exactly equal and opposite to the horizontal component pointing toward the inside of the turn which was created by the banked wing, so that the net horizontal force on the aircraft ends up being zero, then there will be no turn.

Coordinated (non-skidding, non-slipping) flight:

In the case of a normal, coordinated, non-slipping, non-skidding turn, the wing's lift vector is essentially the only aerodynamic force present. (In a powered aircraft in level flight thrust and drag are also present but cancel each other. When an aircraft is in a steady glide or a steady climb there will in fact be an excess drag vector or an excess thrust vector, respectively, but these aren't very significant for our discussion here. More specifically, these thrust and drag forces don't include any sideways components, in the aircraft's reference frame. We'll deal with them in more detail later.) For now the key points of interest are these: relative to the outside world, the wing's lift vector contains a horizontal component which provides the centripetal force that drives the turn. If the aircraft is to turn, it makes no sense at all to "balance" the horizontal forces by introducing an "centrifugal force" vector. "Centrifugal force", in the sense that it is usually used in diagrams relating to turning flight, is just an "apparent" force created by inertia, not a real force. In other words "centrifugal force" is a myth--it doesn't really exist--and it really shouldn't be included on vector diagrams relating to turning flight. A turning aircraft is in an unbalanced condition, not a balanced condition; the horizontal forces cannot add up to zero. So why does the pilot feel no sideways load on his body in a normal, "coordinated", nonslipping, nonskidding turn? Here's why: relative to the aircraft's reference frame, the wing's lift vector points squarely "upward", i.e. it is "square" to the wingspan, or perpendicular to the wingspan. And no other sideways aerodynamic forces are present, in the reference frame of the aircraft and pilot. Therefore the aircraft and the pilot experience no "sideways" force, in their own reference frame. If we introduce an additional, mythical, horizontal force called "centrifugal force", then we create the illusion that the pilot and the slip-skid ball will in fact "feel" a net sideways force, in their own reference frame, even in a normal, "coordinated", turn. This makes no sense.

At this point the reader may be asking "But what about gravity? If we get rid of centrifugal force, won't gravity pull the pilot, and the slip-skid ball, toward the inside of the turn?" An excellent question. Gravity is a real force and certainly helps to determine that the aircraft, and its contents, follow through space. Any vector diagram that is intended to explain the path taken through space by the aircraft must certainly include gravity. However, because gravity acts on every molecule of the aircraft, the pilot's body, the slip-skid ball, etc, all at the same time, it does not tend to pull the slip-skid ball toward the low side of the aircraft, nor does it tend to pull the pilot's body toward the low side of the aircraft. Instead all of these items move through space together, each being accelerated by gravity in exactly the same way. Nor can gravity be "felt" by the pilot--every molecule of each of his bones, muscles, etc are pulled by gravity in exactly the same way and no internal sensations of stress or strain can arise. So vector diagrams which are intended to illustrate the forces "felt" by the pilot's body, and to illustrate the forces which tend to roll the slip-skid ball toward the low side or the high side of the aircraft during a slip or a skid, should not include gravity. These vector diagrams should only include the aerodynamic forces generated by the aircraft. These real, aerodynamic, forces--or perhaps their mirror image--are exactly what we mean when we speak of a "G-load". If the wing is lifting with a force equal to 1G, the pilot will feel this 1G lift force, or perhaps we may prefer to say that the pilot feels an apparent 1G downward force due to the inertia of his body. By 1G we mean a force equal to the body's normal weight on earth. And if the wing is producing 1G of lift, then this 1 G force is exactly what the pilot will feel, regardless of whether he is flying near the surface of the Earth, or near the surface of Mars, or through a cloud of gas somewhere in deep space. Gravity has nothing to do with it. (Of course, the aircraft will be accelerating upward into a loop, rather than following a level flight path, in some of these scenarios!)

One often encounters the idea of a "balance between centrifugal force and gravity". This idea comes up in relation to "coordinated" turning flight, and also in relation to 0-G ballistic or orbital flight where the pilot or astronaut is weightless. This idea is extremely misleading--"centrifugal force" doesn't exist, and you can't "feel" gravity. Zero-G conditions exist whenever the total aerodynamic and thrust forces add up to zero. End of story. Here's a nail in the coffin of the idea of a "balance between centrifugal force and gravity". Imagine an astronaut, stationary in space with respect to the earth, just a bit beyond the earth's atmosphere. Of course he immediately begins to freefall toward the earth. In this particular situation there is no curvature of any kind in his flight path, and therefore we cannot explain his 0-G experience in terms of a "centrifugal force" which "balances" the pull of gravity.

The forces that a pilot feels in flight are the real, aerodynamic forces created by the aircraft, not gravity or "centrifugal force".

For more, go to the subsection entitled "You can't feel gravity!" This subsection is located at the extreme end of the "Theory" section.

Here are just a few more comments on the idea of "centrifugal force". We've stated that when the aircraft exerts an upward lift force on the pilot--let's say 2 G's for the sake of this example--then for inertial reasons the pilot's body seems to feel a 2-G force in the "downward" direction, and so the normal convention is to think of a "positive" G-loading as somehow acting in the "downward" direction. Again, this is just an inertial effect--the only real force involved is the upward 2-G lift force that aircraft is creating. The mirror-image, "downward" reflection of this lift force--the 2-G "downward" force that the pilot seems to "feel"--is only an inertial effect and doesn't really belong in a vector diagram of the actual forces at play. However, for the moment we can go along with the convention that the pilot is somehow "feeling" the apparent downward inertial effect rather than the real upward force. As seen in by an observer in the external world, this apparent downward force, acting on the banked aircraft includes a horizontally outward component, i.e. a "centrifugal" component. So in a very narrow sense it is valid to go along with the convention that the pilot is somehow "feeling" a centrifugal force, not a centripetal force. However, this opens the doorway to many errors. The central point is that this apparent "centrifugal force" is only one component of a larger "apparent force" vector which is simply the mirror image of the vector sum of all the real, aerodynamic and thrust forces (but not the gravitational forces) that are acting on the aircraft. The real net aerodynamic force vector and the mirror-image "apparent force" vector represent two different ways of thinking about the world and really don't belong on the same vector diagram. When we draw the real, net, aerodynamic force and the mirror-image "apparent force" on the same vector diagram, then we are giving mixed signals. What is the message supposed to be? That these forces, being equal and opposite, cancel each other out, so that the pilot is "feeling" a net force of zero, i.e. that he is weightless? That the net horizontal forces add up to zero, i.e. that the aircraft is not turning, even if it is banked? It's really much more accurate to limit our vector diagrams to the real forces at play, without including the "apparent force" vector. Worse yet are the ubiquitous vector diagrams that include the horizontal component of the real aerodynamic force generated by the aircraft, and the "apparent" centrifugal force component which really should just be the horizontal component of the mirror-image "apparent" force vector, equal and opposite to the real aerodynamic force vector--yet in so many of these diagrams, the horizontal component of the real aerodynamic force vector, plus the apparent "centrifugal force" vector, do not add up to zero. What conclusion are we supposed to draw from this? If the apparent "centrifugal force" is really just the mirror-image of the horizontal component of the real aerodynamic forces at play, then how can the apparent "centrifugal force" vector, and the horizontal component of the real aerodynamic force vector, not be equal in magnitude? Again, it's really much better to limit our vector diagrams to the real forces at play, without including the "apparent force" vector components. If we want to include all of the forces that are affecting the acceleration of the aircraft and pilot through space, then we include gravity, and if we want to include only the forces that are "felt" by the pilot or affect the motion of the slip-skid ball, the pilot, etc, in relation to the rest of the aircraft, then we omit gravity, and only show the real aerodynamic forces. Since the mirror image "apparent force" vector is related to the way that the pilot "feels" the real aerodynamic forces, and we've learned that the pilot cannot "feel" gravity, and that gravity alone cannot simulate a "weighted environment" by pulling objects against the low side of an aircraft or spacecraft, then it makes little sense to speak of an apparent "centrifugal force" vector in the case of 0-G spaceflight where gravity is the only real force present. Yet this is often done, especially in the case of orbital flight.

We've strayed rather far from our summary of the forces at work in coordinated, slipping, and skidding turns! Let's continue.

Slipping flight:

A slip occurs when the pilot allows the nose of the aircraft to be yawed in relation to the aircraft's actual direction of travel, so that the nose points toward the high side or outside of the turn, in relation to the direction that the aircraft is actually travelling through the air. During a slip, a pilot in an open-air cockpit who turned his face to point directly into the airflow or relative wind would notice that the nose of the aircraft was yawed toward the high side or outside of the direction that the pilot was actually facing.

Since the fuselage and other aircraft components are being forced to plow through the air in a sideways manner, they generate an aerodynamic sideforce which acts to push the whole aircraft toward the high side or outside of the turn. For a given amount of slip--for example imagine that the nose of the aircraft is yawed to point 10 degrees toward the outside or high side of the turn, in relation to the direction that the aircraft is actually travelling at any given moment--the amount of aerodynamic sideforce that will result is highly dependent upon the fuselage shape and size. For example, imagine 2 sailplanes, each flying at a 10 degree slip angle, as indicated by the telltale or yaw string at the nose of each aircraft. (The telltale or yaw string moves freely in the wind and so indicates the difference between the direction that the nose is pointing, and the actual direction of the airflow or relative wind, which is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the aircraft's actual path of travel through the airmass. So the yaw string indicates whether the nose is pointing directly into the airflow and parallel to the aircraft's actual direction of travel, or is yawed off to one side or the other in relation to the airflow and the actual direction of travel.) If one sailplane has a large, slab-sided fuselage and the other has a slender rounded fuselage, the former will generate a much stronger aerodynamic sideforce than the latter. So for a given yaw string deflection, the pilot in the sailplane with the boxy fuselage will feel a much larger sideforce on his body than the pilot in the sailplane with the slender fuselage. The slip-skid ball will also deflect much further in the boxy aircraft than in the slender aircraft.

In flying-wing aircraft such as hang gliders, there is no fuselage to generate these sideforces, so the sideforces will be very small indeed. Also, a hanging pilot is free to swing from side to side, so instead of "feeling" a force acting against his body, he'll simply note that he tends to hang slightly on the high side or the low side of the aircraft centerline when he relaxes his grip. For these reasons, a slip or skid will feel very different--and will likely be much harder to detect--in a hang glider than in a "conventional" airplane or sailplane.

The aerodynamic sideforce from a slip acts parallel to the aircraft's wingspan. In other words in the aircraft's own reference frame it acts purely in the "sideways" direction, parallel to the wingspan and perpendicular to the wing's lift vector, but in the reference frame of the outside world it contains a significant vertical (upward) component when the bank angle is steep. In fact some aerobatic aircraft can be held indefinitely in a 90-degree bank. To do this, the pilot holds lots of "top rudder" which yaws the nose upward--i.e. skyward-- and generates enough sideforce off of the aircraft fuselage--acting sideways in the aircraft's reference frame and acting vertically upward in the reference frame of the outside world-- that the entire aircraft weight can be supported. (In actual practice the tilted engine thrust also helps support a portion of the aircraft weight).

At more normal bank angles, the aerodynamic sideforce component generated by the slipping fuselage contains a large horizontal component which points toward the outside of the turn. (This is a genuine, real, "centrifugal force" which should not be confused with the "apparent", fake, centrifugal force that is generated by inertial effects when a body follows a curving flight path). This horizontal, centrifugal, aerodynamic force component reduces the net horizontal, centripetal, aerodynamic force that is being generated by the aircraft, so the turn rate is decreased. In extreme cases the pilot applies so much rudder (in relation to the bank angle) that the fuselage creates so much aerodynamic sideforce that the turn rate falls to zero--this is the non-turning, constant-heading slip which is useful for crosswind landings, for increasing drag on final approach, for seeing around the nose of a radial-engined aircraft on final approach, etc.

At extreme bank angles, the aerodynamic sideforce component generated by the slipping fuselage contains a large vertical component which points skyward, as we've already seen. To keep the vertical forces in balance, the wing's lift must be reduced--the sustained 90-degree bank maneuver discussed immediately above is the extreme example of this. Again, the net horizontal, centripetal force ends up being reduced, and the turn rate is decreased.

Skidding flight:

A skid occurs when the pilot allows the nose of the aircraft to be yawed in relation to the aircraft's actual direction of travel, so that the nose points toward the low side or inside of the turn, in relation to the direction that the aircraft is actually travelling through the air. During a skid, a pilot in an open-air cockpit who turned his face to point directly into the airflow or relative wind would notice that the nose of the aircraft was yawed toward the low side or inside of the direction that the pilot was actually facing.

Since the fuselage and other aircraft components are being forced to plow through the air in a sideways matter, they generate an aerodynamic sideforce which acts to push the aircraft toward the low side or inside of the turn. Again, for a given amount of skid, as measured with the yaw string, the resulting aerodynamic sideforce will vary according to the shape and size of the aircraft fuselage and other components. An aircraft with a large, boxy fuselage will generate much more sideforce than an aircraft with a small, streamlined fuselage.

The aerodynamic sideforce from the skid acts parallel to the aircraft's wingspan. In other words in the aircraft's own reference frame it acts purely in the "sideways" direction, perpendicular to the wing's lift vector, but in the reference frame of the outside world it contains a significant vertical (downward) component when the bank angle is steep. This is one of several reasons why a pilot tends to move the control stick aft to increase the wing's angle-of-attack whenever he executes an accidental skidding turn. And this is one of the reasons why an accidental skidding turn can be an invitation to a spin.

The aerodynamic sideforce component generated by the skidding fuselage contains a large horizontal component which points toward the inside of the turn. This horizontal force component increases the net horizontal, centripetal, aerodynamic force being generated by the aircraft, so the turn rate is increased, compared to a non-skidding turn at the same bank angle. However, as a general rule it is far more efficient to yaw the nose back into alignment with the actual direction of flight at any given moment, and then increase the turn rate as desired by increasing the bank angle.

PART 5: A few more notes on coordinated turns, slips, skids, and the nature of aerodynamic sideforces:

The aerodynamic sideforce generated during a slip or a skid is really a form of lift, not drag--it is a force acting perpendicular to the flight path. Of course drag will also increase as the aircraft flies sideways through the air--both the profile drag, and the induced drag associated with producing lift. It is not efficient to fly sideways! However a flying-wing aircraft will experience much less of a drag penalty than an aircraft with a big, boxy fuselage, for a given angle of sideslip through the airmass.

We've already emphasized that a pilot "feels" only the real, aerodynamic force created by the aircraft, not gravity or "centrifugal force". If a turn is "coordinated", then the only net aerodynamic force of interest is the wing's lift vector, acting "square" or perpendicular to the wing and "straight up" in the aircraft's own reference frame, and the pilot will feel no sideforce and the slip-skid ball will stay centered. The net aerodynamic force vector acts "straight up" in the aircraft's reference frame, and this is what the pilot feels. Unfortunately, common convention is to express the apparent G-load as if it were created by some mysterious force within the body, not by the external force of the wing's lift, and therefore we imagine that the usual positive 1-G loading is somehow acting in the "downward" not the "upward" direction. But no matter, this is just a convention. The key point is that whenever there is no aerodynamic sideforce present, then the pilot will not feel any sideforce, regardless of what we may read in books about gravity and "centrifugal force".

We've already seen that a slip occurs when the aircraft is allowed to fly through the air in a sideways manner, with the nose yawed to point toward the high side or the outside of the turn. And we've already seen that as the fuselage and other components plow sideways through the airmass, they create an aerodynamic sideforce that acts toward the outside or high side of the turn. This sideforce directly influences the acceleration and trajectory of the aircraft, but is transmitted to the pilot and the slip-skid ball only in an indirect manner. Therefore the aircraft tends to move toward the outside or high side of the turn in relation to the pilot and slip-skid ball. Or put the other way, the pilot and the slip-skid ball seem to fall to the inside or low side of the turn, as they tend to continue on their own, independent, inertial trajectories. Again, we have an aerodynamic force component acting toward the high side or the outside of the turn, in the reference frame of the aircraft, and the usual convention is to say that the pilot and the slip-skid ball are experiencing a net G-loading which is oriented not quite exactly in the usual "downward" direction, in the aircraft's reference frame, but rather is tilted slightly toward the inside or low side of the turn in the aircraft's reference frame. In a skid the reverse is true--the aircraft generates an aerodynamic sideforce component which is angled toward the inside or low side of the turn, and the pilot and slip-skid ball tend to move toward the outside or high side of the turn.

In either a slip or a skid, the aerodynamic sideforce eventually ends up being transmitted through the aircraft structure into the seatbelts and then into the body of the leaning-over pilot. Also the sloping floor of the tube of the slip-skid ball is able to transmit this sideforce into the ball, once the ball has rolled to the side a bit. Then everything is in equilibrium--the aircraft, the tilted-over pilot, and the displaced ball are all moving through space together as a unit, despite the slip or skid. Despite what you may read in books about "unbalanced" forces on the pilot or the slip-skid ball, the pilot does end up "feeling" exactly the same forces as the aircraft itself "feels". Aircraft and pilot accelerate together and the pilot is not ejected out the side of the aircraft, which is what is implied if the usual comments in the hang gliding and airplane and sailplane literature are taken too literally!

In the literature for airplanes and sailplanes, most "explanations" put the "cart before the horse" by saying that the rudder somehow (mysteriously) changes the turn rate, and this creates a mismatch between "centrifugal force" and the other forces at play, and then these mismatched forces throw the slip-skid ball and the pilot to one side of the aircraft. Changes in the amount of lift generated by the wing are sometimes thought to be able to create the same effects, by affecting the balance between the vertical component of lift, and gravity, and "centrifugal force", and the other forces at play--this is approach that is usually taken by authors writing about turns in hang gliders and trikes. It is much better to simply recognize that the rudder (or the lack of rudder, when rudder is needed to combat adverse yaw etc.) makes the aircraft fly sidewise through the air, and this generates real aerodynamic sideforces, and these aerodynamic sideforces are the direct, fundamental cause both of the sideways tilting of the pilot's body and the slip-skid ball, and of the change in turn rate. Again the key point: the pilot feels only the real, tangible, aerodynamic forces that are being generated by the aircraft. Not "centrifugal force", and not gravity. Any "explanation" of slips and skids which emphasizes the "imbalance between gravity and centrifugal force", or the "imbalance between the horizontal component of lift and centrifugal force", or the "imbalance between the vertical component of lift and weight", is missing the point completely--and doubly so if the "explanation" fails to make any reference to the real, aerodynamic sideforce that is generated as the fuselage and other aircraft components are allowed to fly sideways through the air during a slip or skid.

What happens if, during a turn, the pilot shoves the control stick forward to unload the wing to the zero-lift angle-of-attack? (Or what a happens if a hang glider pilot abruptly pulls in the bar to decrease the wing's angle-of-attack?) If we are basing our analysis on gravity, "centrifugal force", etc., then the answer is quite unclear; at first glance it appears that the pilot and the ball will tend to fall toward the low side or the inside of the turn due to "excess gravity" or "inadequate centrifugal force", in relation to the actual vertical and horizontal force components that the wing is generating. However if we realize that the only thing that matters is the direction of the net aerodynamic force created by the aircraft, then we know that reducing the lift vector--which always acts "square" to the wing and "straight up" in the pilot's reference frame--will not create any imbalanced forces on the pilot or the slip-skid ball. Unless, of course, the aircraft then starts moving earthward in such a manner that the fuselage slides sideways through the airmass, thus creating an aerodynamic sideforce. As long as the pilot uses the rudder to keep the nose pointing directly into the airflow, this cannot happen. What if the pilot is flying a rudderless aircraft, or keeps his feet of the rudder pedals as shoves the stick forward? Repeated experiments in a variety of aircraft show that no discernable slip results in this situation. Possible reasons for this will be discussed in great detail in another section! (Hint: consider the fact that "unloading" the wing will decrease the turn rate, but yaw rotational inertia is still carrying the nose of the aircraft around at the original rate of yaw rotation, which would seem to promote a skid not a slip. Perhaps this "excess" yaw rotation ends up being exactly what is needed to yaw the nose down into the airflow as the flight path curves downward due to the inadequate G-loading.)

PART 6: How to (correctly) diagram the force vectors at play during "coordinated", "slipping", and "skidding" turns:

1. "Coordinated" turn

Start by drawing the weight or gravity vector. (Our initial diagrams will show all the forces at work on the aircraft and contents; later we'll erase the gravity vector to leave only the forces that are actually "felt" by the pilot). Now draw the wing's lift vector, "square" or perpendicular to the banked wing. For the time being make the lift vector of such a length that its vertical component is equal to the gravity vector. The diagram is now complete. The unbalanced horizontal component of the wing's lift vector is the horizontal, centripetal force which drives the turn. Now let's alter the diagram to show only the forces that are "felt" by the pilot. We simply erase the gravity vector. The only remaining vector is the wing's lift vector. Since it acts "square" to the wingspan, and "straight up" in the aircraft's own reference frame, the pilot feels no sideforce, and the slip-skid ball shows no tendency to fall toward the low side or the high side of the aircraft.

Admittedly we've ignored the drag vector, which will bear a small part of the aircraft weight in the case of gliding flight. Similarly, in climbing powered flight the thrust vector will bear a small part of the aircraft weight. These vectors don't involve any sideforces, and so for the sake of our discussion it's simpler to focus on constant-altitude, powered flight where thrust and drag cancel each other.

2. Slipping turn

Again start by drawing the weight or gravity vector. Now draw the wing's lift vector, "square" or perpendicular to the banked wing. For the time being make the lift vector of such a length that its vertical component is equal to the gravity vector. Now add the aerodynamic sideforce created as the fuselage and other aircraft components fly sideways through the airmass. This vector should be drawn parallel to the wingspan, and pointing toward the high side or outside of the turn. Now shorten the wing's lift vector slightly, so that the vertical force components (including gravity) still add up to zero. The diagram is now complete. The vector sum of the horizontal component of the wing's lift vector, plus the horizontal component in the aerodynamic sideforce vector from the slip, yields the (now reduced) net horizontal, centripetal force which drives the turn. Now let's alter the diagram to show only the forces that are "felt" by the pilot. We simply erase the gravity vector. The remaining forces--the actual aerodynamic forces--include a sideforce component that pushes the aircraft toward the outside or high side of the turn. In response, the pilot will tend to fall toward the low side or inside of the turn. If we wish, we can add an "apparent G-force" vector which is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the real aerodynamic forces being created by the aircraft, but we should remember that this "apparent G-force" is really just a reflection of the inertia of the pilot's body, the slip-skid ball, etc., and so this "apparent" force doesn't really belong in the vector diagram.

3. Skidding turn

Again start by drawing the weight or gravity vector. Now draw the wing's lift vector, "square" or perpendicular to the banked wing. For the time being make the lift vector of such a length that its vertical component is equal to the gravity vector. Now add the aerodynamic sideforce created as the fuselage and other aircraft components fly sideways through the airmass. This vector should be drawn parallel to the wingspan, and pointing toward the low side or inside of the turn. Now lengthen the wing's lift vector slightly, so that the vertical force components (including gravity) still add up to zero. The diagram is now complete. The vector sum of the horizontal component of the wing's lift vector, plus the horizontal component in the aerodynamic sideforce vector from the slip, yields the (now increased) net horizontal, centripetal force which drives the turn. Now let's alter the diagram to show only the forces that are "felt" by the pilot. We simply erase the gravity vector. The remaining forces--the actual aerodynamic forces--include a sideforce component that pushes the aircraft toward the inside or low side of the turn. In response, the pilot will tend to move toward the high side or outside of the turn. If we wish, we can add an "apparent G-force" vector which is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the real aerodynamic forces being created by the aircraft, but we should remember that this "apparent G-force" is really just a reflection of the inertia of the pilot's body, the slip-skid ball, etc., and so this "apparent" force doesn't really belong in the vector diagram.

4. Vertical accelerations

In the above diagrams we made the vertical forces, including weight or gravity, add up to zero. But there's no reason that we can't extend or shorten the wing's lift vector, in any of the diagrams, so that we end up with a net upward or downward force and acceleration. This will also affect the horizontal balance of forces, and the turn rate. However, just changing the length of the lift vector does not create a sideforce in the reference frame of the aircraft and pilot. Therefore, just changing the length of the lift vector will not make the pilot, and the slip-skid ball, tend to move toward the low side of the aircraft. The "coordinated" turn will remain "coordinated", and the slipping turn will remain a slip, and the skidding turn will remain a skid, if only the length of the lift vector has changed. Of course, when we introduce a vertical acceleration, it's a fair question as to whether this will make the aircraft move through the airmass in such a way that the fuselage meets the air in a sideways manner and creates aerodynamic side forces where none existed when the vertical forces were in balance. Experimental tests in a wide variety of aircraft suggest that this does not occur; we'll give some possible reasons why in another section of this website. For now we'll repeat the hint that we gave above: at first glance, "unloading" the wing would appear to make the aircraft slide downward (earthward) through the airmass in a sideways slip, with the nose pointing toward the high side or outside of the actual flight path through the airmass. But consider the fact that "unloading" the wing will decrease the turn rate, but yaw rotational inertia will still tend to carry the nose of the aircraft around at the original rate of yaw rotation, which would seem to promote a skid not a slip. Perhaps this "excess" yaw rotation ends up being exactly what is needed to yaw the nose down into the airflow to meet the airflow squarely head-on, even as the flight path curves downward due to the deficiency in the vertical component. If this is the case, then there will be neither a slip nor a skid.

PART 7: Practical use of the rudder to prevent slips or skids:

(Or: when do we expect to see slips or skids in a rudderless aircraft?)

By now we've talked a great deal about slips and skids without any attention to how a pilot uses the rudder in actual flight. The goal is to keep the nose of the aircraft pointing directly into the airflow, not yawed to the high side or low side in relation to the airflow, i.e. in relation to the relative wind, which simply blows equal in velocity and opposite in direction to the aircraft's actual direction of travel through the airmass. In other words we are keeping the nose pointing in the same direction as we actually going, through the airmass.

As a pilot starts to roll an aircraft into a turn, the drag on the outboard, rising, wing tends to increase. This is adverse yaw. The usual explanation is that the outboard wing is creating more drag "because it is creating more lift" than the inboard wing. However, adverse yaw continues to act even when the roll rate becomes constant. If the roll rate is constant, not accelerating, then both wings are in fact creating the same amount of lift. The real cause of adverse yaw has to do with the way that the upward motion of the rising wing makes it experience a change in apparent airflow direction in a manner that increases drag. For full details take a look at the "See How It Flies" webpage in the "Links" section of this website.

At any rate, because of adverse yaw, the pilot has to apply inside rudder pressure as he rolls the aircraft into a turn, or else adverse yaw would tend to yaw the nose toward the outside of the turn, creating a temporary slip. This is not desirable--what we really want is to get the nose yawing around the horizon in the opposite direction, toward the inside of the turn, since a turn involves a steady rotation in both the yaw and pitch axes. (And even in the roll axis, surprisingly, if the turn is climbing or descending--more on this later). In fact, even if the aircraft were designed with "perfect" ailerons that ended up creating no adverse yaw at all, the pilot would still have to apply some inside rudder to supply the needed yaw torque to start the nose yawing around the horizon. Otherwise we would see some slip as the nose of the aircraft tended to remain on its initial heading for a few moments, even as the banked wing started to produce a sideforce and the flight path started to curve. In aircraft that use spoilers for roll and yaw control, the spoilers provide this yaw torque, as well as the yaw torque needed to overcome adverse yaw. In this case the aircraft may be able to enter a turn, without slipping, even without using any rudder. But in most cases we expect to see some slip as we enter a turn in a rudderless aircraft.

Once the aircraft settles into a steady turn, very little rudder is needed. If the airspeed is low, yielding a tight turn radius, and the wingspan is large and the fuselage is long and the tail is large, a bit of inside rudder may be needed to compensate for "airflow curvature" effects. The curvature of the airflow in the turn increases the airspeed experienced by the outboard wing, which increases both lift and drag on the outboard wing, and the curving airflow also creates an inward airflow in the vicinity of the rear of the aircraft, which pushes the tail inwards and yaws the nose outward. All these effects tend to create a slight slip, if inside rudder is not applied. In a rudderless aircraft we will like see just a touch of slip in a steady turn at a low airspeed.

As the pilot rolls outside of the turn, the situation is basically the mirror-image of the turn entry, and outboard rudder is generally needed to combat adverse yaw and to stop the aircraft's yaw rotational inertia, both of which tend to keep swinging the nose around in the direction of the turn, creating a skid as the wings roll back toward wings-level. In a rudderless aircraft we'll typically see a bit of skid as we roll out of the turn--a yaw string will blow toward the inside or low side of the turn--though again we may be able to avoid this by using well-designed spoilers for roll control.

In a wide variety of aircraft, I've found that hauling aft on the control stick, or pushing the control stick forward, or pushing out the bar (shifting body weight aft), or pulling in the bar (shifting body weight forward) has no noticeable effect on the aircraft's tendency to slip or skid, either while flying at a constant bank angle or while rolling into a turn or rolling back to wings-level. The average airspeed--as opposed to the change in airspeed and the G-loading--is a significant factor; in general adverse yaw is more pronounced at low airspeeds. However some hang gliders with a fair amount of anhedral may have significantly higher roll rates--and therefore significantly more adverse yaw--at high airspeeds and low angles-of-attack.

Most aircraft can be rolled into a turn and back to wings-level without any use of the rudder, as long as the pilot is willing to accept a bit of slip and skid. However these slips and skids generally decrease the roll rate, for reasons that will be discussed later. However in the case of aircraft with a lot of anhedral, it is possible for the slip or slid to actually help to increase the roll rate as the aircraft enters or exits a turn.

PART 8: Some myths regarding turns:

Myth #1: Banking an aircraft permits a turn, but does not cause a turn.

Myth #2: If a pilot banks an aircraft, but does not make a nose-up pitch input—i.e. if the pilot banks the aircraft but does not move the control bar forward (in a hang glider) or does not move the control stick or yoke aft (in conventional airplane or sailplane)—the aircraft will not turn. Instead, it will slip sideways (earthwards), without turning.

Myth #3: A slip is caused by inadequate lift in relation to the bank angle, which allows gravity to pull the pilot, the slip-skid ball, and perhaps also the entire aircraft, toward the low side of the banked aircraft, i.e. toward the low side of the turn. (Much less common is the logical compliment: that a skid is caused by excess lift in relation to the bank angle.)

Myth #4: A slip is caused by an inadequate turn rate in relation to the bank angle, so that there is not enough "centrifugal force" in relation to the bank angle. This allows gravity to pull the pilot, the slip-skid ball, and perhaps also the entire aircraft, toward the low side of the aircraft. A skid is caused by an excess turn rate in relation to the bank angle, so that there is too much "centrifugal force" in relation to the bank angle. "Centrifugal force" overpowers "gravity" and this throws the pilot, the slip-skid bubble, and perhaps also the entire aircraft, toward the outside of the turn. A turn is "coordinated" when the amount of "centrifugal force" is "right" for the bank angle, so that "centrifugal force" and "gravity" are in the proper balance.

Myth #5: This is a variation of myth #4. A slip is caused by an inadequate turn rate in relation to the bank angle, so that there is not enough "centrifugal force" in relation to the horizontal component of lift. The resulting vector sum of "centrifugal force" plus the "horizontal component of lift" yields a net side force toward the inside of the turn, which throws the pilot, the slip-skid ball, and perhaps also the entire aircraft, toward the low side or the inside of the turn. A skid is caused by an excess turn rate in relation to the bank angle, so that there is too much "centrifugal force" in relation to the horizontal component of lift. The resulting vector sum of "centrifugal force" plus the "horizontal component of lift" yields a net side force toward the outside of the turn, which throws the pilot, the slip-skid ball, and perhaps also the entire aircraft, toward the outside of the turn.

Myth #6: The amount of curvature in the flight path influences the amount of "centrifugal force" that is "felt" by the aircraft (and the pilot, and the slip-skid ball), and the airspeed influences the amount of curvature in the flight path that will be present for any given bank angle. A slip or skid is created by an imbalance between "centrifugal force" and other forces such as gravity, the vertical component of lift, the horizontal component of lift, etc.. Therefore too much airspeed in relation to the bank angle can create a skid, and too little airspeed in relation to the bank angle can create a slip.

Myth #7: As the bank angle increases toward 90 degrees, the G-loading increases toward infinity and the stall speed also increases toward infinity. At 90 degrees of bank, G-loading and stall speed are infinite.

Myth #8: A pilot must use extreme caution while entering a turn, due to the increase in stall speed. Banked flight is intrinsically more dangerous than wings-level flight. If an aircraft's stall speed is 40 mph, then its 2-G stall speed is 56 mph. If the pilot started at 50 mph and rolled to a 60-degree bank angle, he would be in great danger of stalling, even if he didn't move the control stick aft (or even if he didn't push the control bar forward, in a hang glider).

 

PART 9: "You can't feel gravity!"

You can't feel gravity, because it simultaneously pulls on every molecule of your body. Since gravity works "from the inside", not by pressing against a few external surfaces, no internal stresses or strains are created. So you can't feel gravity. If you are travelling in a vehicle, gravity simultaneously acts on every molecule of the vehicle, and every molecule of all the contents of the vehicle, so gravity can never pull contents of the vehicle--including the driver or pilot--up or down toward the "high side" or the "low side" of the vehicle. Also, you can't "feel" centrifugal force--because it doesn't exist! You only can "feel" the genuine, external forces that are imposed upon your body by your surroundings. In an aircraft, you "feel" only the real, aerodynamic and thrust forces created by the aircraft. In a car, you only "feel" the real, tangible traction forces created by the tires on the pavement, plus any significant aerodynamic forces. And so on and so forth.

(Note: for convenience we're going to be a bit sloppy and use "1-G" as a measure of force--equal to the weight in pounds of the object of concern--as well as a measure of acceleration).

Examples:

1. Person standing on ground. Forces at play: 1-G downward force of gravity pulling down on body, 1-G upward force of earth pushing up on feet. Net force: 0 G's. Net acceleration: 0 G's. Forces "felt" by the person: all of the above except gravity. Net force "felt" by person: 1-G upward force of earth pushing against their feet. Unfortunately, common convention is to express the apparent G-load as if it were created by some mysterious force within the body, not by the external force of the floor pressing upward, and therefore we imagine that the usual positive 1-G loading is somehow acting in the "downward" not the "upward" direction. Intuitively this seems to make some sense, until we realize that this apparent G-load is caused entirely by the floor pushing upwards on the body, and really has nothing whatsoever to do with downward pull of gravity. Read on for more! But no matter, this is just a convention. The true force "felt" by the person is actually 1-G in the upward direction.

2. Pilot in normal 1-G flight. Forces at play: 1-G downward force of gravity pulling down on pilot and on aircraft, and 1-G upward lift force created by wings. Net force: 0 G's. Net acceleration: 0 G's. Forces "felt" by the pilot and by the aircraft structure: all of the above except gravity. Net force "felt" by pilot and by the aircraft structure: 1-G upward lift force created by wings.

3. A pilot has "unloaded" his aircraft's wing to the zero-lift angle-of-attack, and has set thrust exactly equal to drag, achieving momentary "zero G" flight or weightlessness. Forces at play: 1-G downward force of gravity, plus a forward thrust force, plus a rearward drag force. Net force: 1-G downward. Net acceleration: 1-G downward. Forces "felt" by the pilot: all of the above except gravity. Net force "felt" by the pilot, and by the aircraft structure: zero G's.

4. Pilot has rolled to a 90-degree bank, and has shoved the control stick forward to "unload" the wing to the zero-lift angle-of-attack. He is using the rudders (if needed) to keep the nose pointing directly into the airflow; i.e. the aircraft is not slipping sideways through the airmass. He has set the engine to create a thrust force that exactly equals drag, achieving momentary "zero G" flight or weightlessness. Forces at play: 1-G earthward pull of gravity, plus a forward thrust force, plus a rearward drag force. Net force: 1-G earthward pull of gravity. Net force: 1-G earthward. Net acceleration: 1-G earthward. Forces "felt" by the pilot: all of the above except gravity. Net force "felt" by the pilot, and by the aircraft structure and contents: zero G's. The pilot doesn't "fall" toward the low side of the aircraft and the slip-skid ball doesn't "fall" toward the low side of the aircraft.

5. Pilot beginning a 2-G pull-up to enter a loop. Forces at play: 1-G downward pull of gravity, 2-G upward pull of wings. Net force: 1-G upward. Net acceleration: 1-G upward. Forces "felt" by the pilot: all of the above except gravity. Net force "felt" by the pilot and by the aircraft structure: 2-G upward.

6. A pilot, inverted at the top of a loop, has set the wing at the angle-of-attack which will produce "positive" 1-G, in the aircraft's reference frame, at that airspeed. Forces at play: 1-G earthward pull of gravity, 1-G earthward pull of wing's lift. Net force: 2-G earthward. Net acceleration: 2-G earthward. Forces "felt" by the pilot: all of the above except gravity. Net force "felt" by the pilot: 1-G earthward, which is 1-G downward as seen by an external observer, and 1-G "upward" in the reference frame of the aircraft and pilot. This is the exactly the same G-loading, in the reference frame of the aircraft and pilot, as exists in normal, "upright", unaccelerated flight.

7. Astronaut near earth, but beyond earth's atmosphere; rocket motor is producing 10 G's of thrust. Forces at play: 1-G downward pull of gravity, 10-G thrust from motor. Net force: vector sum of thrust plus gravity; here we haven't specified the direction of travel of the rocket so we can't quite finish the math. Net acceleration: again this will be determined by the vector sum of thrust and gravity. Forces "felt" by astronaut: all of the above except gravity. Net force "felt " by the astronaut: 10-G.

8. Astronaut far from earth, at some hypothetical point in space where the gravitational pull of all the stars, planets, etc happens to be completely negligible; rocket motor is producing 10 G's of thrust. Forces at play: 10-G thrust from motor. Net force: 10-G. Net acceleration: 10-G. Forces "felt" by astronaut: all of the above except gravity. Net force "felt " by the astronaut: 10-G.

9. Astronaut near earth, but beyond earth's atmosphere; rocket motor is switched off. Forces at play: 1-G downward pull of gravity. Net force: 1-G downward pull of gravity. Net acceleration: 1-G downward. Forces "felt" by astronaut: all of the above except gravity. Net force "felt " by the astronaut: 0-G. If the spacecraft is in orbit, the resulting downward motion is precisely matched to the craft's forward velocity in such a way that the flight path curves in such a way that the distance from the craft to the earth remains exactly constant. On the other hand if the spacecraft is completely stationary with respect to the earth, then it will immediately begin plunging earthwards. In this case there is no curvature in the flight path, so we are not tempted to "explain" away the astronaut's 0-G perceptions by saying that "centrifugal force" is "balancing" the pull of gravity.

10. Diver in water, ballasted to neutral buoyancy, and not moving with respect to water. Forces at play: 1-G downward force of gravity pulling down on body, 1-G upward force of water pushing up on body. Net force: 0 G's. Net acceleration: 0 G's. Forces "felt" by the person: all of the above except gravity. Net force "felt" by person: 1-G upward force of water pushing up on body. Since this buoyant force is dispersed over the entire surface of the body, it does not create very much stress or strain within the body, and the resulting sensation is somewhat like 0-g weightlessness.

 

PART 10: Notes on the July 2000 article "Turning flight and sideslip in hang gliders"

This is another long article I wrote a few years ago on the topic of turning flight and slips and skids, especially in hang gliders. It covers all my early experiments on the relationship between pitch inputs and slips and skids in hang gliders and sailplanes and airplanes. In the future that material will also appear in the main body of this website. This older article also contains a lot of theory; in particular the subject of "airflow curvature" is explored in detail. The article is a few years old and in need of updating. The main conclusions about pitch inputs and sideslips and skids are still completely valid. None of the experiments on yaw-roll coupling had been carried out at the time when this paper was written. The main point in need of change is this: I now believe that most modern hang gliders show negative coupling between yaw and roll, not positive coupling between yaw and roll. In other words if a glider gets yawed to the left in relation to the glider's actual direction of travel through the airmass, or if a glider is struck by a sudden crosswind from the right, then the glider will tend to roll to the right, except at the lowest airspeeds, when the coupling between yaw and roll may be neutral. At higher speeds, most modern gliders have enough anhedral to overpower the normal "positive" coupling between yaw and roll which would normally be created by the swept or delta-shaped wing, so that the yaw-roll coupling ends up being negative. This anhedral is created in large part not by the droop in the leading edges relative to the keel, but rather by the washout built into the wing. The older article assumed that most hang gliders would show positive coupling between yaw and roll at all airspeeds, due to sweep. The comments that I made based on these particular assumptions are still relevant to rigid-wing hang gliders, which typically have sweep and little or no anhedral (in fact these aircraft usually have dihedral). They are not relevant to modern flex-wing gliders, except in some cases at airspeeds near or below min. sink. Several places in the article I refer to a "hypothetical blade-wing hang glider" with so much anhedral that there is a negative coupling between yaw and roll. I now realize that this is a good description of nearly all modern flex-wing hang gliders, at least at airspeeds above min. sink--I've seen clear evidence of a negative coupling between yaw and roll on a Wills Wing Raven, Skyhawk, and Spectrum, as well as an Airborne Blade. Some of the sections of this long July 2000 article that are affected by this error include the sections that deal with the effect of a vertical fin on the handling characteristics of a hang glider, the sections that deal with the total balance of roll torques in a stabilized, constant-bank turn, and the sections that address towing and lockout dynamics. One other area where I have changed my thinking--at several points in the older article I allowed for the possibility that some hang gliders might show a slight skid, rather than a slight slip, in a stabilized, constant-bank turn. I now feel that it is quite unlikely that any rudderless aircraft would skid in a stabilized, constant-bank turn. Again, all of this is completely peripheral to the main question addressed in the older article, which was "Does a hang glider tend to slip toward the low wing if the pilot pulls in the bar while banked, or if the pilot banks the glider without letting out the bar in the usual nose-up pitch 'coordination' input"?


Turning flight and sideslip